---
date: 2022-08-24
title: The smallest PHP version switcher
description: A really quick PHP version switcher built with Homebrew
author: harmen-janssen
url: /articles/php-version-switcher
norday: true
---

PHP is becoming more and more feature-rich, so we recommend using a recent, stable version such as PHP 8.1 in your projects.

However, you might have to support projects built on older versions of PHP. This can lead to incompatibilities and impair your ability to run the project locally.

Tools like [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and [Homestead](https://laravel.com/docs/9.x/homestead) are good solutions to this problem, but in this post I will show a really lightweight way of working around this.

Here we go:

👉 Step 1: install multiple versions of PHP using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/):

```sh
brew install php@7.4
brew install php@8.0
brew install php@8.1
```

👉 Step 2: add aliases to your shell for enabling the various versions:

```sh
alias php7="brew unlink php@8.0 php@8.1 && brew link php@7.4"
alias php8="brew unlink php@8.1 php@7.4 && brew link php@8.0"
alias php81="brew unlink php@8.0 php@7.4 && brew link php@8.1"
```

That's it! Done.

Run `php8` to switch to PHP 8, run `php7` to switch to PHP 7.4, et cetera.
Tweak the script to match your version requirements and preferences.

Do remember to unlink all other versions in your aliases, to avoid conflicts.

## Composer version constraints

Oh! One last thing.

Now that your PHP versions depends on whatever you switched to last, it's a matter of time before you will realize you ran a command using the wrong PHP version. Oops.

It helps to add a _version constraint_ to your composer.json. This will warn you when you're running `composer install` using the wrong version.

You can add this to your `require` block. Here's an example:

```json
"require": {
    "php": "~8.1",
}
```

With this safeguard in place, you're good to go.

Thanks to [Martijn](https://grrr.tech/authors/martijn-gastkemper/) for this handy solution. 🙌
